TRANSACTIONS WITH PERSONS OTHER THAN CLIENTS 

Rosemary Abel is an attorney who is representing the seller of an apartment complex. The client instructs Rosemary to tell the buyer's lawyer that “the complex is easily worth $2.5 million.” In fact, the seller's latest appraisal indicates that the property is worth substantially less than that. Which of the following statements most accurately describes Rosemary's responsibilities under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
A) Rosemary may not make the statement because it is a false statement of material fact. 
B) Rosemary may make the statement because she does not owe the other lawyer a duty of candor in an out-of-court negotiation. 
C) Rosemary may make the statement because it is not a statement of material fact. 
D) Rosemary may make the statement but must disclose the appraisal.
ANSWER: C
EXPLANATION: Lawyers are not allowed under Rule 4.1 to make false statements of material fact to third persons. However, statements of value are not relied on in our culture as statements of fact. Instead, under generally accepted practices in negotiation, it is expected that each side will “puff" about value. See Comment 1 to Rule 4.1. Rosemary, therefore, may state the inflated value of the property. Answer A is incorrect because the general rule against making false statements of fact does not apply to statements of value. Answer B) is incorrect because lawyers are constrained by Rule 4.1 not to make material misstatements of fact even outside of a court proceeding. Answer D is incorrect because there is no duty to disclose the appraisal. Under Rule 4.1(b), Rosemary would have the obligation to reveal material information like the appraisal only if it was necessary in order to avoid assisting in a fraud. Answer C is correct. 

Clarence Widmer is an attorney who represents the Halcyon Property Company. His client is about to close a series of transactions with which Clarence is assisting. Clarence has just learned that his client fraudulently altered the inspection reports on the properties that it is selling, and upon which the buyers are relying. The client cannot be dissuaded from closing the transactions, and the buyers will suffer significant financial harm if the sales close. Which of the following statements most accurately states Clarence's responsibilities under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
A) Clarence must withdraw from representing Halcyon and must inform the buyers of the fraud if disclosure is necessary to avoid assisting in the fraud. 
B) Clarence must withdraw from representing Halcyon but may not inform the buyers of the fraud because that information is confidential. 
C) Clarence must withdraw from representing Halcyon and may inform the buyers of the fraud if disclosure is necessary to avoid assisting in the fraud. 
D) Clarence may withdraw from representing Halcyon but may not inform the buyers of the fraud because that informtion is confidential. 
ANSWER: A
EXPLANATION: Under Rule 1.2D), Clarence may not assist the client in the perpetration of a fraud. Clarence must withdraw because otherwise he will violate Rule 1.2D). See Rule 1.16A). Therefore, Answer D) is incorrect. Answer B) is incorrect because Clarence at least has the option to inform the buyers to prevent the significant financial harm that otherwise will befall the buyers in a fraudulent transaction in which the client has used the lawyer's services. Rule 1.6B)(2). If disclosure is necessary to avoid assisting in the fraud, Clarence has the obligation and not just the option to inform the buyers of the fraud. Rule 4.1B). Therefore, Answer C) is incorrect because it states that disclosure is optional even when it is necessary to avoid assisting in fraud. Answer A) most accurately states Clarence's responsibilities. 

Randy Pickett is an attorney who represents Wilco Paint Company. Wilco has been sued for employment discrimination by a woman who has been using her work e-mail account to send questions about the suit to and receive answers from her attorney. Under Wilco's written company policy, Wilco has the right to inspect and copy any messages sent or received on Wilco e-mail accounts. A Wilco executive copies the plaintiff's messages to and from her lawyer and sends those messages to Randy. Which of the following statements most accurately describes Randy's duties under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
A) Randy need not notify the plaintiff's attorney about these messages unless other law requires him to do so. 
B) Randy must notify the plaintiff's lawyer that Randy has possession of these messages. 
C) Randy must notify the plaintiff's lawyer that Randy has possession of these messages and send them to the plaintiff's lawyer. 
D) Randy must seek to withdraw from the case because he has used means of obtaining evidence that violate the rights of the plaintiff.
ANSWER: A
EXPLANATION: Wilco has the right to inspect and copy company e-mails. 
ere not "inadvertently sent," Randy has no obligation under Rule 4.4B) to notify opposing counsel that he has them, unless rules of civil procedure or other law impose that duty. See ABA Formal Op. 11-460. Answer B) is incorrect because it states the duty under Rule 4.4B), which does not apply. Answer C) is incorrect because there is no duty under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct to notify or send, although rules of procedure or other law could impose such a duty. Answer D) is incorrect because Randy has not violated Rule 4.4A)'s prohibition on obtaining evidence in violation of the rights of third person's. Randy did not gather the evidence, and in any event Wilco was within its rights to obtain the messages. Furthermore, even if Randy had violated a Rule, that would not require him to seek to withdraw (although that might be a remedy sought by the plaintiff if Randy had obtained evidence in violation of her rights). Answer A) is correct. 

Ramon Martinez is an attorney who is representing a wife in a child custody dispute. Ramon receives an e-mail message from a woman who is a FaceBook "friend” of the husband. The e-mail message attaches a photo copied from the husband's FaceBook account in which the husband appears to be smoking marijuana. The friend attaches another in which the husband appears to be dancing nude on a beach with several other people in a similar state of undress. Ramon can reasonably assume that if he uses these photos at the custody hearing the husband will suffer serious embarrassment and perhaps lose his job as a counselor at a parochial school. Which of the following most accurately describes Ramon's options under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
A) Ramon may use the photos because he did not obtain them illegally. 
B) Ramon may not use the photos because he would cause the husband embarrassment. 
C) Ramon may use the photos because he has a substantial purpose other than embarrassing the husband. 
D) Ramon may not use the photos unless his sole purpose in doing so is to demonstrate that his client should have custody of the children.
ANSWER: Answer C
EXPLANATION: Ramon will cause embarrassment with this evidence, and he would violate Rule 4.4A) if he had no substantial purpose other than that. In this case, however, the husband's drug use and other odd behavior is surely relevant to the issue of custody, and so Ramon has the substantial purpose of showing that his client will provide a better environment for the children. As long as he has such a substantial purpose, he may use means that cause embarrassment. Answer A) is incorrect because lawyers cannot use even legal means that have no substantial purpose other than to cause embarrassment. Answer B) is incorrect because the standard is whether the lawyer has any substantial purpose other than the embarrassment. Parties to litigation are embarrassed regularly about probative evidence against them. Their embarrassment by itself does not prevent lawyers from using such evidence to help their clients. Answer D) is wrong because mixed motives are acceptable. Ramon need not demonstrate that he has no purpose other than the legitimate one of showing that the husband would not be a suitable custodial parent. As long as Ramon has that legitimate purpose, the husband's embarrassment is no bar to use of the evidence. Answer C) is correct. 

Brian Hubbard is an attorney who is eager to resolve a claim that is pending against his client in bankruptcy. Brian knows that the claim will not be dischargeable in bankruptcy as long as the claimant files a claim by the deadline. His opposing counsel is a young, inexperienced lawyer who knows little about the intricacies of bankruptcy law. Brian tells this young lawyer that if she files a claim it will just be discharged under bankruptcy law. Which of the following statements most accurately describes the propriety of this statement under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
A) The statement is not misconduct because no reasonable lawyer would rely upon opposing counsel to accurately state the law that will apply to a dispute. 
B) The statement is not misconduct because it is not a false statement of material fact, 
C) The statement is misconduct because of the disparity in knowledge and experience between the two lawyers. 
D) The statement is misconduct because it is a false statement of law.
ANSWER: Answer D
EXPLANATION: Under Rule 4.1A), lawyers are prohibited from making false statements of law, which is exactly what Brian has done. Under Rule 8.4A), that violation of Rule 4.1A) is misconduct. Answer A) is incorrect because it is the making of the statement that is the violation, not the reasonableness of anyone's reliance on it. That issue might matter under the substantive law of fraud, but it is not relevant to the violation of Rule 4.1A). Answer B) is incorrect because misstatements of law are violations of Rule 4.1A), not just misstatements of fact. Answer C) is incorrect because Rule 4.1A) is not triggered by disparity in experience or knowledge. Any material misstatement of the law, even among lawyers of equal experience and knowledge, is a violation of Rule 4.1A). Answer D) is correct. 


Victoria Shay is an attorney who is representing a class of plaintiffs against a large corporation in a case about the alleged manufacture and distribution of a defective drug. The drug company is of course represented by counsel, and Victoria knows that. A former employee of the company contacted Victoria, who secretly met with the former employee and obtained a large number of clearly privileged communications between the company's lawyers and senior company officials. Which of the following statements most accurately describes the propriety of Victoria's conduct under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
A) Victoria committed misconduct when she had direct contact with a former constituent of a represented party and when she obtained the privileged communications. 
B) Victoria did not commit misconduct when she had direct contact with a former constituent of a represented party but did commit misconduct when she obtained the privileged communications. 
C) Victoria committed misconduct when she had direct contact with a former constituent of a represented party but did not commit misconduct when she obtained the privileged communications. 
D) Victoria did not commit misconduct.
ANSWER: B
EXPLANATION: Lawyers are permitted to have direct contact with former constituents of a represented organization. See Comment 7 to Rule 4.2. Therefore, there was nothing wrong with having the contact. However, lawyers must not use means of obtaining evidence that violate the rights of third persons, and using a disgruntled former employee to obtain privileged documents violates the rights of the drug company to the privilege. Answer A) is wrong because the direct contact was permissible. Answer C) is wrong on all counts. The contact is permitted but obtaining the evidence is not. This answer reverses those conclusions. Answer D) is wrong because one part of Victoria's acts is misconduct. Answer B) is correct. 


Deanna Derosier is an attorney who is investigating a claim for a client about an accident on the property of Guillard Enterprises, Inc. (GEI). She has not filed the case yet, but she knows that GEI expects litigation and is represented by counsel in the matter. Deanna wants to speak to an employee of GEI without having to tell GEI's lawyer about the interviews. The employee works on GEI's loading dock and had nothing to do with the accident, except that the witness may have seen what happened when Deanna's client fell. Which of the following statements most accurately describes Deanna's options under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
A) Deanna may talk to the employee without notifying GEI's counsel as long as she does so before filing suit. 
B) Deanna may not talk to the witness without notifying GEI's lawyer because Deanna knows that GEI is represented in the matter. 
C) Deanna may talk to the witness without notifying GEI's counsel. 
D) Deanna may not talk with the witness because the witness still works for GEI.
ANSWER: C
EXPLANATION: When a lawyer knows that an opposing party is represented in the matter, the lawyer may not have direct contact with that opposing party without permission of the other party's lawyer. Rule 4.2. However, when the opposing party is an organization, the lawyer may have direct contact with constituents of the organization as long as the constituent does not fall into any one of three categories. This loading dock worker presumably does not regularly consult with GEI's lawyers about the matter or have the authority to bind the company in the matter. It is given in the question that he did not cause the accident, so no act or omission of his will be attributed to the organization for purposes of civil liability. Deanna, therefore, may talk to the employee without permission of GEI's lawyer. Answer A) is incorrect because the obligations of Rule 4.2 are not dependent in any way upon whether there is pending litigation. Answer B) is wrong because the loading dock worker does not fit into any of the categories of corporate constituents who are off-limits. Answer D) is incorrect because current employees or other current constituents may be contacted without permission of GEI's lawyers as long as they do not fit into any of the three categories of people who are off-limits. Answer C) is correct. 


Lawrence Woolsey is an attorney who is handling a divorce case. Although the adverse party, Sandy Green, is represented by counsel, Lawrence has received a telephone call from Sandy to discuss the case with him. Which of the following statements most accurately describes Lawrence's options under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
A) Lawrence may continue the conversation as long as he informs Sandy's counsel immediately of the contact and discloses the substance of the conversations. 
B) Lawrence may continue the conversation as long as he informs Sandy that he represents her husband and is therefore not disinterested. 
C) Lawrence must terminate the conversation unless Sandy gives informed consent to speaking with him. 
D) Lawrence must immediately terminate the conversation.
ANSWER: D
EXPLANATION: Clients like Sandy sometimes get impatient with their own lawyers and contact their adversary's lawyers directly. By doing so, Sandy creates a problem for Lawrence because he is bound by Rule 4.2 not to have direct contact with a represented party, even one who consents and who is angry at her own lawyer. Lawrence must immediately terminate the conversation. Comment 3 to Rule 4.2. Answers A), B), and C) are incorrect because they would permit Lawrence to continue the conversation. He must terminate it. The best practice would then be to notify Sandy's counsel of the contact, but under no circumstances may Lawrence continue the conversation with a represented party. Answer D) is correct.


Krista Waterman is an attorney whose client is about to have a meeting with the other party to a dispute. Krista wants the client to secretly record the conversation for Krista's use in connection with the dispute. Which of the following statements most accurately describes Krista's obligations under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
A) Krista may counsel the client to do the taping as long as doing so is legal in their jurisdiction. 
B) Krista may counsel the client to tape the conversation because Krista is not personally participating in the taping. 
C)Krista may not counsel the client to engage in the taping because she would be engaging in a criminal act that reflects adversely on her honesty and fitness as a lawyer in other respects. 
D) Krista may not counsel the client to engage in the taping because she would be engaging in conduct involving dishonesty.
ANSWER: A
EXPLANATION: No Rule of Professional Conduct directly bars Krista from counseling the client to tape the conversation. Answer D) is incorrect because the 
ncluded that taping conversations is not inherently deceitful. ABA Formal Op. 01-422. Because it is not a crime in every jurisdiction for one party to a conversation to tape it, Answer C) is incorrect. However, in some states it is a crime to tape a conversation without the consent of all parties. A lawyer in such a jurisdiction could not tape because the lawyer would be committing a criminal act that reflects adversely on the attorney's honesty and trustworthiness, in violation of Rule 8.4B). If the lawyer cannot do the taping, then Krista may not use the client as her agent to violate the Rules of Professional Conduct. Rule 8.4A). Answer B) is incorrect because Krista may not escape any culpability just by having her client do the taping. Krista must check the law of her local jurisdiction before counseling her client to wear a wire. 


Stanley Fredrickson is an attorney who for several years has been assisting a client in obtaining bank financing for new projects that use "fracking" to obtain oil and gas from rock formations. Stanley has several such deals underway for the client. Stanley has just learned that the client all along has been perpetrating an ongoing fraud with these deals. Which of the following statements most accurately describes Stanley's options under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
A) Stanley may immediately withdraw from the representation and may give notice of his withdrawal to the banks involved in the ongoing deals. 
B) Stanley must immediately withdraw from the representation but may not under any circumstances give notice of his withdrawal to the banks involved in the ongoing deals. 
C) Stanley may immediately withdraw from the representation but may not give notice of his withdrawal to the banks involved in the ongoing deals. 
D) Stanley must immediately withdraw from the representation and may have to give notice of his withdrawal to the banks involved in the ongoing deals.
ANSWER: D
EXPLANATION: Under Rule 1.2D), Stanley may not assist in the perpetration of a fraud. When continued representation will require the lawyer to violate the Rules of Professional Conduct, the lawyer must withdraw. Rule 1.16A)(1). Answers A) and C) are incorrect because withdrawal is mandatory, not permissive. The harder part of the question concerns notice to the banks. Stanley must make sure that he avoids assisting in the fraud, and he may give notice of his withdrawal to the banks if his withdrawal is not enough. This is the so-called "noisy withdrawal.” See Comment 10 to Rule 1.2 and Comment 3 to Rule 4.1. Answer B) is incorrect because Stanley has this option. The noisy withdrawal is not a mandatory step, however, because under Rule 1.6B)(2) Stanley would have the option to reveal the fraud to the banks, thus making the “noisy withdrawal” unnecessary. The “noisy withdrawal” is simply an interim step that a lawyer might take to avoid assisting in the fraud without going so far as to reveal confidential client information. Answer D) is correct because the withdrawal is mandatory but the notice of the withdrawal to the banks is simply one option. 

Ralph Taggart is an attorney who is representing a client in a civil case involving an alleged breach of contract. A crucial issue in the case will be what the parties intended by certain provisions in their complicated contract. In discovery, Ralph has received an electronic version of the contract from her adversary's attorney. Ralph is informed that he can access certain “meta-data" in that contract, which may include revisions and comments that were made by the opposing party (and not its counsel) during the negotiations over the contract. May Ralph take steps to access this "meta-data,” consistent with his obligations under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
ANSWER: Ralph may access the "meta-data." There is nothing in the Model Rules of Professional Conduct to prevent him from doing so. Nothing in the question indicates that Ralph would be using methods to obtain evidence that violate the rights of third parties. See Rule 4.4A). After all, this information was produced to him, and in any event the comments and changes were not made by counsel. Although it is possible that his opposing counsel could have taken steps to "scrub” the "meta-data" from the electronic version of the document, Ralph is under no obligation to decline to look for it. See ABA Formal Op. 06-442. 


Joy Conoway is an attorney who represents the wife in a divorce case. The husband is represented by counsel, Joy's client is tired of paying hefty legal bills and tired of seeing the marital estate dissipated by the similarly hefty legal bills that her husband is paying. Joy wants to suggest to her client that the client approach the husband directly about resolving all issues by agreement. Joy could coach her client on how to approach the husband and how best to negotiate a good deal. Is Joy's plan consistent with her responsibilities under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct? 
ANSWER: Yes, Joy's plan is consistent with her obligations under the Model Rules of Professional Conduct. The tension here arises from Joy's responsibility not to have contact with the husband, whom she knows to be represented by counsel. See Rule 4.2. Although Joy has no intention of doing so directly, she is thinking about suggesting that her client do so. Joy of course cannot violate the rules herself or through the acts of another. Rule 8.4A). On the other hand, clients have the right to speak to each other, and Joy owes her client a duty of candid advice under Rule 2.1. See Comment 4 to Rule 4.2. The lawyer may advise the client that they may contact the opposing party directly, and the lawyer may even coach the client about how to approach and negotiate with the represented party on the other side. ABA Formal Op. 11-461. 


Dayle Ridley is an attorney who is in the midst of trying to negotiate the settlement of a civil claim with the assistance of a mediator. The mediator, who is not a judge, is conducting the settlement negotiations in a "caucus” format, and is shuttling back and forth between the parties. Ordinarily, Dayle would feel free in a negotiation to bluff about her settlement authority by telling the plaintiff's counsel that she cannot exceed a certain payment, even if her authority is actually for a greater amount. May Dayle engage in this tactic in a caucused mediation? 
ANSWER: Dayle may bluff about her settlement authority. Under Rule 4.1, she is not permitted to make material misstatements of fact. Statements about the acceptability of a certain sum in settlement of a matter generally speaking are not statements of fact. Comment 2 to Rule 4.1. The fact that the negotiation is being conducted as a caucus negotiation does not change the attorney's responsibilities or options. ABA Formal Op. 06-439. 